design-docs/reporting.md, before:

This specification covers some improvements to how reports are generated and presented to the user.

# Use cases

## Developer views a summary of all tests executed by the build

When a build runs multiple test suites, it can be difficult to determine exactly which tests were executed and which ones failed, particularly if the
build console output is not retained.

It should be possible to view a persistent summary of which tests were executed by the build and a summary of their results.

## Developer views a summary of all code quality checks executed by the build

As for test execution, it can be difficult to determine exactly which code quality checks were executed and which ones failed.

It should be possible to view a persistent summary of which code quality checks were executed by the build and a summary of their results.

## Developer views a summary of all reports generated by the build

The reports generated by a build contain useful information about the things that the build has done, or useful information about the build itself.

It should be possible to view a persistent summary of the reports that the build has generated. It should be possible for a build to declare custom
reports.

## Developer views a summary of all documentation generated by the build

It should be possible to view a persistent summary of the documentation that the build has generated. It should be possible for a build to declare
custom documentation.

## Developer views a summary of the test coverage for all tests executed by the build

As for test execution. Test results and summaries should include coverage information.

## CI build publishes the reports, documentation and summary generated by the build

The CI build is often the reference build for generating documentation and reports, and for executing tests and other code quality checks. The build
should generate these artifacts and any summaries in a way that makes it easy to use the CI server's artifact publishing mechanism to publish this
output.

# Implementation plan

The approach used here is to incrementally grow a dashboard report that summarises the reports, verifications and documentation produced by the build.
The report will start off extremely basic, and over a number of steps, more content will be added to the report. Both built-in and custom reports,
verifications and documentation will be supported.

In addition, the task graph will be changed to make the dashboard report more usable and reliable in various cases.

## Add a build dashboard report (DONE)

Add a basic dashboard HTML report that links to the reports declared in the build.

### User visible changes

Add `build-dashboard` plugin that, by convention, generates a dashboard HTML report that links to all enabled reports generated by the current project
and all subprojects.

To use in a single project build:

    apply plugin: 'java'
    apply plugin: 'checkstyle'
    apply plugin: 'build-dashboard'

Running `gradle buildDashboard` will generate an HTML report that links to the test and checkstyle reports, if they exist. It will not generate those
reports.

Running `gradle check buildDashboard` will generate the test and checkstyle reports, and an HTML report that links to them.

To use in a multi-project build:

    apply plugin: 'build-dashboard'

    subprojects {
        apply plugin: 'java'
        apply plugin: 'checkstyle'
    }

Running `gradle check buildDashboard` in the root project will generate the test and checkstyle reports for all projects, and an HTML report that
links to them.

Note that running `gradle check buildDashboard` will not generate the dashboard report if any check fails. Either `--continue` or
`VerificationTask.ignoreFailures` can be used as workarounds. Later stories will make this work better.

Note that running `gradle buildDashboard check` will not do anything very useful at this stage. Later stories will make this work better.

### Implementation approach

1. Add a `GenerateBuildDashboard` task type.
    * Implements `Reporting`.
    * Takes a set of `Report` instances as input.
    * Generates an HTML report that is more or less a list of reports and a link to their output.
2. Add a `build-dashboard` plugin.
    * Adds a `buildDashboard` task of type `GenerateBuildDashboard`.
    * Configures `buildDashboard` to report on all enabled `Report` instances for all tasks of type `Reporting` in the current project and all subprojects.

## Schedule dashboard report task to run after all reporting and verification tasks

Run any reporting tasks that are to be executed by the build before running the dashboard report task, so that the dashboard report includes results from
the current build.

### User visible changes

Running `gradle dashboardReport check` will run the reporting and verification tasks first, then the `dashboardReport` task, followed by the remaining
check tasks.

Running `gradle check dashboardReport --continue` will generate the dashboard report on failures, regardless of whether any reporting tasks have been
succefully executed.

For this story, running `gradle check dashboardReport` without `--continue` will not generate the dashboard report on failures. Later stories will improve
this behaviour.

### Implementation approach

1. Add a "always runs after" dependency type to the task graph.
    * When "taskA always runs after taskB" and both are in the task graph, then taskA must not be executed until after taskB has been executed, and
      must execute regardless of whether taskB succeeds or fails. Execution of taskA must honour the other dependencies of taskA.
2. When `dashboardReport` task is added to the graph, add "always runs after" dependencies from `dashboardReport` to any task that generates one of its
   input reports and that is also included in the task graph.

### Test coverage

- For a multi-project build where `rootProject.check.dependsOn(dashboardReport)` and that applies the code quality plugins:
    - verify that running `gradle check` generates the report after each of the code quality tasks have completed.
    - verify that running `gradle check --continue` generates the report when one of the code quality tasks fails.
- When `a.mustRunAfter b` and `a.dependsOn c` and `b.dependsOn d`
    - running `gradle a` runs c then a.
    - running `gradle a b` runs d then b then c then a.
    - running `gradle a b --continue` where b is broken, then runs d then b then c then a.
    - running `gradle a b --continue` where d is broken, then runs d then c then a.
- When `a.mustRunAfter b` and `b.mustRunAfter a`
    - running `gradle a` runs a only.
    - running `gradle a b` gives a reasonable error message
- When `a.mustRunAfter b` and `b.dependsOn a`
    - running `gradle a` runs a only.
    - running `gradle b` gives a reasonable error message
- When `a.mustRunAfter b` and `b.mustRunAfter c`
    - running `gradle a b c` runs c then b then a.
- In parallel mode:
    - when `a.mustRunAfter b` and b depends on a slow task c in another project, verify that c runs before b runs before a.

## Automatically add dashboard report task to task graph

A DSL element will be added to allow a _finaliser_ task to be automatically added to the task graph when some other task is scheduled to run. This task
and its dependencies are run only if the target task is executed.

The `build-dashboard` plugin will use this to ensure that the dasboard report task is always updated when any of the reports are generated.

This type of task relationship will also be used to generate test and code coverage reports after the tests have been executed. It will also be used to
undeploy applications and stop servers and clean up other resources when the tests that use them have finished executing.

### User visible changes

Running `gradle checkstyleMain` will also execute `dashboardReport`. The `dashboardReport` task will be executed regardless of whether the `checkstyleMain`
task succeeds or fails and regardless of whether `--continue` is used or not.

The `dashboardReport` task is not executed when none of the reporting tasks in the graph are executed due to failed dependencies.

TBD - Need to some reasonable behaviour when:

1. A build has the checkstyle plugin applied.
2. `gradle check` is run and implcitly generates the dashboard.
3. The checkstyle plugin is removed.
4. `gradle check` is run. The dashboard should still be generated or removed. Currently, the old report would not be regenerated.

### Implementation approach

When a task a is a finaliser for task b, then:

- when task b is added to the graph, then task a must be added to the graph.
- task a must always execute after task b.
- task a must be executed if task b is executed, and regardless of whether task b succeeds or fails.
- task a should not be executed if task b is not executed and task a is otherwise not required to be executed. Here 'not executed' includes:
    - was not executed due to a failed dependency.
    - was considered up-to-date.
    - was disabled or skipped due to an onlyIf { } constraint.
    - is a finaliser for tasks which were not executed for some reason.
- A dependency task c of task a should not be executed if task b is not executed (as above) and the task c is otherwise not required to be executed

### Test coverage

For build with the `build-dashboard` plugin applied to the root project and the (say) `checkstyle` plugin applied:

- running `gradle check` will run the `buildDashboard` task.
- running `gradle check` will run the `buildDashboard` task when the checkstyle task fails.
- running `gradle check` will not run the `buildDashboard` task when the checkstyle task is not executed due to a failed dependency.
- running `gradle check --continue` will not run the `buildDashboard` task when the checkstyle task is not executed due to a failed dependency.

TBD - some general int tests

## Separate test report generation from test execution

Configure a `TestReport` task to always run after the `Test` task, and change the `TestReport` type to implement `Reporting`. Remove (via deprecation) the reporting from the `Test` task type.

## Include summary of all verification task results in the dashboard report

Change the dashboard report so that for each report generated by a verification task, include a visual indication of whether the verification has
succeeded or failed.

### User visible changes

The report will show more information.

### Implementation approach

1. Add `VerificationFailedException`.
2. Change the contract for verification tasks, so that they must throw `VerificationFailedException` on verification failure. Any other exception is
   treated as a general failure and the outputs generated by that task are assumed to be incomplete.
3. Persist the verification exception.
4. Dashboard report includes message from verification exception.

## Include test summary in the dashboard report

Change the dashboard report so that for each report generated by a `Test` task, include summary information about how many tests where executed, passed,
failed and ignored.

### User visible changes

The report will show more information.

### Implementation approach

1. Add `VerificationSummary` interface.
2. Add `TestSummary` interface.
    * How many tests were executed.
    * How many tests failed.
    * How many tests were ignored.
3. Change contract of verification tasks, so that they must provide a serializable `VerificationSummary` result after execution.
4. Persist the verification result.
5. Dashboard report includes test summary when verification result is an instanceof `TestSummary`.

## Allow a custom verification task to be implemented

## Allow a custom reporting task to be implemented

## Include code coverage summary in the dashboard report

## Link to the API documentation in the dashboard report

## Link to custom documentation in the dashboard report

## Link to the dependency reports in the dashboard report

## Link to the project structure reports in the dashboard report

## Link to the build comparison report in the dashboard report

## Link to the profile report in the dashboard report

## Add an HTML report for Checkstyle

## Include Checkstyle summary in the dashboard report

## Include CodeNarc summary in the dashboard report

## Include PMD summary in the dashboard report

## Include FindBugs summary in the dashboard report

## Include JDepend summary in the dashboard report

## Include a summary of custom reporting task in the dashboard report


# Open issues

Commit message:

Added test coverage to finaliser task story.

design-docs/reporting.md, after:

This specification covers some improvements to how reports are generated and presented to the user.

# Use cases

## Developer views a summary of all tests executed by the build

When a build runs multiple test suites, it can be difficult to determine exactly which tests were executed and which ones failed, particularly if the
build console output is not retained.

It should be possible to view a persistent summary of which tests were executed by the build and a summary of their results.

## Developer views a summary of all code quality checks executed by the build

As for test execution, it can be difficult to determine exactly which code quality checks were executed and which ones failed.

It should be possible to view a persistent summary of which code quality checks were executed by the build and a summary of their results.

## Developer views a summary of all reports generated by the build

The reports generated by a build contain useful information about the things that the build has done, or useful information about the build itself.

It should be possible to view a persistent summary of the reports that the build has generated. It should be possible for a build to declare custom
reports.

## Developer views a summary of all documentation generated by the build

It should be possible to view a persistent summary of the documentation that the build has generated. It should be possible for a build to declare
custom documentation.

## Developer views a summary of the test coverage for all tests executed by the build

As for test execution. Test results and summaries should include coverage information.

## CI build publishes the reports, documentation and summary generated by the build

The CI build is often the reference build for generating documentation and reports, and for executing tests and other code quality checks. The build
should generate these artifacts and any summaries in a way that makes it easy to use the CI server's artifact publishing mechanism to publish this
output.

# Implementation plan

The approach used here is to incrementally grow a dashboard report that summarises the reports, verifications and documentation produced by the build.
The report will start off extremely basic, and over a number of steps, more content will be added to the report. Both built-in and custom reports,
verifications and documentation will be supported.

In addition, the task graph will be changed to make the dashboard report more usable and reliable in various cases.

## Add a build dashboard report (DONE)

Add a basic dashboard HTML report that links to the reports declared in the build.

### User visible changes

Add `build-dashboard` plugin that, by convention, generates a dashboard HTML report that links to all enabled reports generated by the current project
and all subprojects.

To use in a single project build:

    apply plugin: 'java'
    apply plugin: 'checkstyle'
    apply plugin: 'build-dashboard'

Running `gradle buildDashboard` will generate an HTML report that links to the test and checkstyle reports, if they exist. It will not generate those
reports.

Running `gradle check buildDashboard` will generate the test and checkstyle reports, and an HTML report that links to them.

To use in a multi-project build:

    apply plugin: 'build-dashboard'

    subprojects {
        apply plugin: 'java'
        apply plugin: 'checkstyle'
    }

Running `gradle check buildDashboard` in the root project will generate the test and checkstyle reports for all projects, and an HTML report that
links to them.

Note that running `gradle check buildDashboard` will not generate the dashboard report if any check fails. Either `--continue` or
`VerificationTask.ignoreFailures` can be used as workarounds. Later stories will make this work better.

Note that running `gradle buildDashboard check` will not do anything very useful at this stage. Later stories will make this work better.

### Implementation approach

1. Add a `GenerateBuildDashboard` task type.
    * Implements `Reporting`.
    * Takes a set of `Report` instances as input.
    * Generates an HTML report that is more or less a list of reports and a link to their output.
2. Add a `build-dashboard` plugin.
    * Adds a `buildDashboard` task of type `GenerateBuildDashboard`.
    * Configures `buildDashboard` to report on all enabled `Report` instances for all tasks of type `Reporting` in the current project and all subprojects.

## Schedule dashboard report task to run after all reporting and verification tasks

Run any reporting tasks that are to be executed by the build before running the dashboard report task, so that the dashboard report includes results from
the current build.

### User visible changes

Running `gradle dashboardReport check` will run the reporting and verification tasks first, then the `dashboardReport` task, followed by the remaining
check tasks.

Running `gradle check dashboardReport --continue` will generate the dashboard report on failures, regardless of whether any reporting tasks have been
succefully executed.

For this story, running `gradle check dashboardReport` without `--continue` will not generate the dashboard report on failures. Later stories will improve
this behaviour.

### Implementation approach

1. Add a "always runs after" dependency type to the task graph.
    * When "taskA always runs after taskB" and both are in the task graph, then taskA must not be executed until after taskB has been executed, and
      must execute regardless of whether taskB succeeds or fails. Execution of taskA must honour the other dependencies of taskA.
2. When `dashboardReport` task is added to the graph, add "always runs after" dependencies from `dashboardReport` to any task that generates one of its
   input reports and that is also included in the task graph.

### Test coverage

- For a multi-project build where `rootProject.check.dependsOn(dashboardReport)` and that applies the code quality plugins:
    - verify that running `gradle check` generates the report after each of the code quality tasks have completed.
    - verify that running `gradle check --continue` generates the report when one of the code quality tasks fails.
- When `a.mustRunAfter b` and `a.dependsOn c` and `b.dependsOn d`
    - running `gradle a` runs c then a.
    - running `gradle a b` runs d then b then c then a.
    - running `gradle a b --continue` where b is broken, then runs d then b then c then a.
    - running `gradle a b --continue` where d is broken, then runs d then c then a.
- When `a.mustRunAfter b` and `b.mustRunAfter a`
    - running `gradle a` runs a only.
    - running `gradle a b` gives a reasonable error message
- When `a.mustRunAfter b` and `b.dependsOn a`
    - running `gradle a` runs a only.
    - running `gradle b` gives a reasonable error message
- When `a.mustRunAfter b` and `b.mustRunAfter c`
    - running `gradle a b c` runs c then b then a.
- In parallel mode:
    - when `a.mustRunAfter b` and b depends on a slow task c in another project, verify that c runs before b runs before a.

## Automatically add dashboard report task to task graph

A DSL element will be added to allow a _finaliser_ task to be automatically added to the task graph when some other task is scheduled to run. This task
and its dependencies are run only if the target task is executed.

The `build-dashboard` plugin will use this to ensure that the dasboard report task is always updated when any of the reports are generated.

This type of task relationship will also be used to generate test and code coverage reports after the tests have been executed. It will also be used to
undeploy applications and stop servers and clean up other resources when the tests that use them have finished executing.

### User visible changes

Running `gradle checkstyleMain` will also execute `dashboardReport`. The `dashboardReport` task will be executed regardless of whether the `checkstyleMain`
task succeeds or fails and regardless of whether `--continue` is used or not.

The `dashboardReport` task is not executed when none of the reporting tasks in the graph are executed due to failed dependencies.

TBD - Need to some reasonable behaviour when:

1. A build has the checkstyle plugin applied.
2. `gradle check` is run and implcitly generates the dashboard.
3. The checkstyle plugin is removed.
4. `gradle check` is run. The dashboard should still be generated or removed. Currently, the old report would not be regenerated.

### Implementation approach

When a task a is a finaliser for task b, then:

- when task b is added to the graph, then task a must be added to the graph.
- task a must always execute after task b.
- task a must be executed if task b is executed, and regardless of whether task b succeeds or fails.
- task a should not be executed if task b is not executed and task a is otherwise not required to be executed. Here 'not executed' includes:
    - was not executed due to a failed dependency.
    - was considered up-to-date.
    - was disabled or skipped due to an onlyIf { } constraint.
    - is a finaliser for tasks which were not executed for some reason.
- A dependency task c of task a should not be executed if task b is not executed (as above) and the task c is otherwise not required to be executed

### Test coverage

For build with the `build-dashboard` plugin applied to the root project and the (say) `checkstyle` plugin applied:

- running `gradle check` will run the `buildDashboard` task.
- running `gradle check` will run the `buildDashboard` task when the checkstyle task fails.
- running `gradle check` will not run the `buildDashboard` task when the checkstyle task is not executed due to a failed dependency.
- running `gradle check --continue` will not run the `buildDashboard` task when the checkstyle task is not executed due to a failed dependency.

- Given `a.finalizedBy b` and `a.dependsOn c` and `b.dependsOn d`, then:
    - `gradle a` runs `c` then `a` then `d` then `b`.
    - `gradle a b` runs `c` then `a` then `d` then `b`.
    - `gradle d a` runs `d` then `c` then `a` then `b`.
    - `gradle a -x b` runs `c` then `a` only. Neither `b` nor `d` are added to the task graph.
    - `gradle a -x d` runs `c` then `a` then `b`. Task `d` is not added to the task graph.
    - `gradle a -x a` runs no tasks. No tasks are added to the task graph.
    - `gradle a --continue` runs `c` only when `c` fails.
    - `gradle a b --continue` runs `c` then `a` then `d` then `b` when `a` fails.
    - `gradle a b --continue` runs `c` then `d` then `b` when `c` fails.
    - `gradle a` run `c` only when `a` is disabled. All tasks are added to the task graph.
    - `gradle a` run `c` only when `a.onlyIf { false }` . All tasks are added to the task graph.
    - `gradle b a` fails with a circular dependency failure.
    - `gradle a --parallel` runs `c` then `a` then `d` then `b` when `a` and `c` are in different projects to `b` and `d`.
- Given `a.finalizedBy b` and `b.finalizedBy c`, then `gradle a` runs `a` then `b` then `c`.
- Given `a.dependsOn [b, c]` and `c.finalizedBy b` then `gradle a` runs `c` then `b` then `a`.
- Verify execution fails with 'circular dependency' failure when `a.finalizedBy b` and `a.dependsOn c` and `c.mustRunAfter b`.

## Separate test report generation from test execution

Configure a `TestReport` task to always run after the `Test` task, and change the `TestReport` type to implement `Reporting`. Remove (via deprecation) the reporting from the `Test` task type.

## Include summary of all verification task results in the dashboard report

Change the dashboard report so that for each report generated by a verification task, include a visual indication of whether the verification has
succeeded or failed.

### User visible changes

The report will show more information.

### Implementation approach

1. Add `VerificationFailedException`.
2. Change the contract for verification tasks, so that they must throw `VerificationFailedException` on verification failure. Any other exception is
   treated as a general failure and the outputs generated by that task are assumed to be incomplete.
3. Persist the verification exception.
4. Dashboard report includes message from verification exception.

## Include test summary in the dashboard report

Change the dashboard report so that for each report generated by a `Test` task, include summary information about how many tests where executed, passed,
failed and ignored.

### User visible changes

The report will show more information.

### Implementation approach

1. Add `VerificationSummary` interface.
2. Add `TestSummary` interface.
    * How many tests were executed.
    * How many tests failed.
    * How many tests were ignored.
3. Change contract of verification tasks, so that they must provide a serializable `VerificationSummary` result after execution.
4. Persist the verification result.
5. Dashboard report includes test summary when verification result is an instanceof `TestSummary`.

## Allow a custom verification task to be implemented

## Allow a custom reporting task to be implemented

## Include code coverage summary in the dashboard report

## Link to the API documentation in the dashboard report

## Link to custom documentation in the dashboard report

## Link to the dependency reports in the dashboard report

## Link to the project structure reports in the dashboard report

## Link to the build comparison report in the dashboard report

## Link to the profile report in the dashboard report

## Add an HTML report for Checkstyle

## Include Checkstyle summary in the dashboard report

## Include CodeNarc summary in the dashboard report

## Include PMD summary in the dashboard report

## Include FindBugs summary in the dashboard report

## Include JDepend summary in the dashboard report

## Include a summary of custom reporting task in the dashboard report


# Open issues
