subprojects/docs/src/docs/userguide/running-builds/introduction.adoc, before:

// Copyright 2023 the original author or authors.
//
// Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
// you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
// You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
//      http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
// distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
// WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
// See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
// limitations under the License.

[[introduction]]
= Introduction

Everyone has to start somewhere, and if you're new to Gradle, this is where to begin.

[[gs:installation]]
== Gradle Installation
If all you want to do is run an existing Gradle build, then you don't need to install Gradle if the build uses the <<gradle_wrapper#gradle_wrapper,Gradle Wrapper>>.
This is identifiable by the presence of the `gradlew` or `gradlew.bat` files in the root of the build.
You just need to make sure your system <<installation#sec:prerequisites,satisfies Gradle's prerequisites>>.

Android Studio comes with a working installation of Gradle, so you don't need to install Gradle separately when only working within that IDE.

If you need to install Gradle before the tutorial, you can do so in the <<installation.adoc#installation,installation section>>.

[[gradle_intro]]
== Introduction to Gradle

The introduction section will give you an overview of Gradle:

[sidebar]
_Gradle level_: **Beginner** +
_Reading time_: **25 minutes**

<<gradle_basics.adoc#gradle,Part 1.>> Gradle Basics +
<<command_line_interface.adoc#command_line_interface,Part 2.>> Gradle's Command Line Interface +
<<gradle_wrapper.adoc#gradle_wrapper,Part 3.>> Gradle's Wrapper +
<<settings_file_basics.adoc#settings_file_basics,Part 4.>> Settings File +
<<build_file_basics.adoc#build_file_basics,Part 5.>> Build Files +
<<task_basics.adoc#task_basics,Part 6.>> Tasks +
<<plugin_basics.adoc#plugin_basics,Part 7.>> Plugins +
<<intro_multi_project_builds.adoc#intro_multi_project_builds,Part 8.>> Multi-Project Builds +

[[getting_started]]
== Getting Started Tutorial

The tutorial will take you from Gradle initialization all the way through to utilizing Gradle's task caching for your basic Java App. No previous experience is necessary but a basic knowledge of Java and Kotlin is nice to have.

[sidebar]
_Training level_: **Beginner** +
_Training time_: **55 minutes**

The tutorial covers:

<<part1_gradle_init#part1_begin,Part 1.>> Initializing the Project +
<<part2_gradle_tasks#part2_begin,Part 2.>> Running Tasks +
<<part3_gradle_dep_man#part3_begin,Part 3.>> Understanding Dependencies +
<<part4_gradle_plugins#part4_begin,Part 4.>> Applying Plugins +
<<part5_gradle_inc_builds#part5_begin,Part 5.>> Exploring Incremental Builds +
<<part6_gradle_caching#part6_begin,Part 6.>> Enabling the Cache +
<<part7_gradle_refs#part7_begin,Part 7.>> Using Reference Materials +

Commit message:

major update post review with akshay

subprojects/docs/src/docs/userguide/running-builds/introduction.adoc, after:

// Copyright 2023 the original author or authors.
//
// Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
// you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
// You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
//      http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
// distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
// WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
// See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
// limitations under the License.

[[introduction]]
= Introduction

Everyone has to start somewhere, and if you're new to Gradle, this is where to begin.

There are two options to get started using Gradle:

1. Read the <<gradle_intro,introduction chapters>> for a theoretical approach.
2. Follow the <<getting_started,getting started tutorial>> for a hands-on approach.

[[gradle_intro]]
== 1. Introduction to Gradle

The introduction section goes through the Gradle basics so that you can quickly understand how to invoke tasks, turn on Gradle features, apply plugins, add dependencies to your project and more.

[sidebar]
_Training level_: **Beginner** +
_Reading time_: **25 minutes**

The introduction covers:

<<gradle_basics.adoc#gradle,Part 1.>> Gradle Overview +
<<gradle_wrapper.adoc#gradle_wrapper,Part 2.>> Gradle's Wrapper +
<<command_line_interface.adoc#command_line_interface,Part 3.>> Gradle's Command Line Interface +
<<settings_file_basics.adoc#settings_file_basics,Part 4.>> Settings File +
<<build_file_basics.adoc#build_file_basics,Part 5.>> Build Files +
<<task_basics.adoc#task_basics,Part 6.>> Tasks +
<<plugin_basics.adoc#plugin_basics,Part 7.>> Plugins +
<<gradle_optimizations.adoc#gradle_optimizations,Part 8.>> Gradle Optimizations +
<<intro_multi_project_builds.adoc#intro_multi_project_builds,Part 9.>> Multi-Project Builds +

[[getting_started]]
== 2. Getting Started Tutorial

The tutorial will take you from Gradle initialization all the way through to utilizing Gradle's task caching for your basic Java App.
No previous experience is necessary but a basic knowledge of Java and Kotlin is nice to have.

If you need to install Gradle before the tutorial, you can do so in the <<installation.adoc#installation,installation section>>.

[sidebar]
_Training level_: **Beginner** +
_Training time_: **55 minutes**

The tutorial covers:

<<part1_gradle_init#part1_begin,Part 1.>> Initializing the Project +
<<part2_gradle_tasks#part2_begin,Part 2.>> Running Tasks +
<<part3_gradle_dep_man#part3_begin,Part 3.>> Understanding Dependencies +
<<part4_gradle_plugins#part4_begin,Part 4.>> Applying Plugins +
<<part5_gradle_inc_builds#part5_begin,Part 5.>> Exploring Incremental Builds +
<<part6_gradle_caching#part6_begin,Part 6.>> Enabling the Cache +
<<part7_gradle_refs#part7_begin,Part 7.>> Using Reference Materials +
