subprojects/docs/src/docs/userguide/core-plugins/distribution_plugin.adoc, before:

// Copyright 2017 the original author or authors.
//
// Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
// you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
// You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
//      http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
// distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
// WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
// See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
// limitations under the License.

[[distribution_plugin]]
= The Distribution Plugin

The Distribution Plugin facilitates building archives that serve as distributions of the project. Distribution archives typically contain the executable application and other supporting files, such as documentation.


[[sec:distribution_usage]]
== Usage

To use the Distribution Plugin, include the following in your build script:

.Using the Distribution Plugin
====
include::sample[dir="snippets/base/distribution/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=use-plugin]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/base/distribution/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=use-plugin]"]
====

The plugin adds an extension named `distributions` of type link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.distribution.DistributionContainer.html[DistributionContainer] to the project. It also creates a single distribution in the distributions container extension named `main`. If your build only produces one distribution you only need to configure this distribution (or use the defaults).

You can run `gradle distZip` to package the main distribution as a ZIP, or `gradle distTar` to create a TAR file. To build both types of archives just run `gradle assembleDist`. The files will be created at `__$buildDir__/distributions/__${project.name}__-__${project.version}__.__«ext»__`.

You can run `gradle installDist` to assemble the uncompressed distribution into `__$buildDir__/install/__${project.name}__`.

[[sec:distribution_tasks]]
== Tasks

The Distribution Plugin adds a number of tasks to your project, as shown below.

`distZip` — link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.tasks.bundling.Zip.html[Zip]::
Creates a ZIP archive of the distribution contents.

`distTar` — link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.Task.html[Task]::
Creates a TAR archive of the distribution contents.

`assembleDist` — link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.Task.html[Task]::
_Depends on_: `distTar`, `distZip`
+
Creates ZIP and TAR archives of the distribution contents.

`installDist` — link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.tasks.Sync.html[Sync]::
Assembles the distribution content and installs it on the current machine.

For each additional distribution you add to the project, the Distribution Plugin adds the following tasks, where _distributionName_ comes from link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/distribution/Distribution.html#getName--[Distribution.getName()]:

`__distributionName__DistZip` — link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.tasks.bundling.Zip.html[Zip]::
Creates a ZIP archive of the distribution contents.

`__distributionName__DistTar` — link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.tasks.bundling.Tar.html[Tar]::
Creates a TAR archive of the distribution contents.

`assemble__DistributionName__Dist` — link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.Task.html[Task]::
_Depends on_: `__distributionName__DistTar`, `__distributionName__DistZip`
+
Creates ZIP and TAR archives of the distribution contents.

`install__DistributionName__Dist` — link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.tasks.Sync.html[Sync]::
Assembles the distribution content and installs it on the current machine.

The following sample creates a `custom` distribution that will cause four additional tasks to be added to the project: `customDistZip`, `customDistTar`, `assembleCustomDist`, and `installCustomDist`:

.Adding extra distributions
====
include::sample[dir="snippets/base/distribution/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=custom-distribution]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/base/distribution/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=custom-distribution]"]
====

Given that the project name is `myproject` and version `1.2`, running `gradle customDistZip` will produce a ZIP file named `myproject-custom-1.2.zip`.

Running `gradle installCustomDist` will install the distribution contents into `__$buildDir__/install/custom`.

[[sec:distribution_contents]]
== Distribution contents

All of the files in the `src/__$distribution.name__/dist` directory will automatically be included in the distribution. You can add additional files by configuring the link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/distribution/Distribution.html[Distribution] object that is part of the container.

.Configuring the main distribution
====
include::sample[dir="snippets/base/distribution/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=configure-distribution]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/base/distribution/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=configure-distribution]"]
====

In the example above, the content of the `src/readme` directory will be included in the distribution (along with the files in the `src/main/dist` directory which are added by default).

The `distributionBaseName` and `distributionClassifier` properties have also been changed. This will cause the distribution archives to be created with a different name.

[[sec:publishing_distributions]]
== Publishing

A distribution can be published using the <<publishing_ivy.adoc#publishing_ivy, Ivy Publish Plugin>> or <<publishing_maven.adoc#publishing_maven, Maven Publish Plugin>>.

[[sec:publishing_distributions_publish_plugins]]
=== Using the Ivy/Maven Publish Plugins

To publish a distribution to an Ivy repository with the <<publishing_ivy.adoc#publishing_ivy, Ivy Publish Plugin>>, add one or both of its archive tasks to an link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.publish.ivy.IvyPublication.html[IvyPublication]. The following sample demonstrates how to add the ZIP archive of the `main` distribution and the TAR archive of the `custom` distribution to the `myDistribution` publication:

.Adding distribution archives to an Ivy publication
====
include::sample[dir="snippets/ivy-publish/distribution/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=publishing]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/ivy-publish/distribution/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=publishing]"]
====

Similarly, to publish a distribution to a Maven repository using the <<publishing_maven.adoc#publishing_maven, Maven Publish Plugin>>, add one or both of its archive tasks to a link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.publish.maven.MavenPublication.html[MavenPublication] as follows:

.Adding distribution archives to a Maven publication
====
include::sample[dir="snippets/maven-publish/distribution/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=publishing]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/maven-publish/distribution/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=publishing]"]
====

Commit message:

Remove usage of project.buildDir from documentation
Usage is replaced by the layout.buildDirectory property or sometimes
removed altogether when possible.

Issue #20210

subprojects/docs/src/docs/userguide/core-plugins/distribution_plugin.adoc, after:

// Copyright 2017 the original author or authors.
//
// Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
// you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
// You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
//      http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
// distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
// WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
// See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
// limitations under the License.

[[distribution_plugin]]
= The Distribution Plugin

The Distribution Plugin facilitates building archives that serve as distributions of the project. Distribution archives typically contain the executable application and other supporting files, such as documentation.


[[sec:distribution_usage]]
== Usage

To use the Distribution Plugin, include the following in your build script:

.Using the Distribution Plugin
====
include::sample[dir="snippets/base/distribution/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=use-plugin]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/base/distribution/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=use-plugin]"]
====

The plugin adds an extension named `distributions` of type link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.distribution.DistributionContainer.html[DistributionContainer] to the project. It also creates a single distribution in the distributions container extension named `main`. If your build only produces one distribution you only need to configure this distribution (or use the defaults).

You can run `gradle distZip` to package the main distribution as a ZIP, or `gradle distTar` to create a TAR file. To build both types of archives just run `gradle assembleDist`.
The files will be created at `__layout.buildDirectory.dir__("distributions/__${project.name}__-__${project.version}__.__«ext»__")`.

You can run `gradle installDist` to assemble the uncompressed distribution into `__layout.buildDirectory.dir__("install/__${project.name}__")`.

[[sec:distribution_tasks]]
== Tasks

The Distribution Plugin adds a number of tasks to your project, as shown below.

`distZip` — link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.tasks.bundling.Zip.html[Zip]::
Creates a ZIP archive of the distribution contents.

`distTar` — link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.Task.html[Task]::
Creates a TAR archive of the distribution contents.

`assembleDist` — link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.Task.html[Task]::
_Depends on_: `distTar`, `distZip`
+
Creates ZIP and TAR archives of the distribution contents.

`installDist` — link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.tasks.Sync.html[Sync]::
Assembles the distribution content and installs it on the current machine.

For each additional distribution you add to the project, the Distribution Plugin adds the following tasks, where _distributionName_ comes from link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/distribution/Distribution.html#getName--[Distribution.getName()]:

`__distributionName__DistZip` — link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.tasks.bundling.Zip.html[Zip]::
Creates a ZIP archive of the distribution contents.

`__distributionName__DistTar` — link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.tasks.bundling.Tar.html[Tar]::
Creates a TAR archive of the distribution contents.

`assemble__DistributionName__Dist` — link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.Task.html[Task]::
_Depends on_: `__distributionName__DistTar`, `__distributionName__DistZip`
+
Creates ZIP and TAR archives of the distribution contents.

`install__DistributionName__Dist` — link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.tasks.Sync.html[Sync]::
Assembles the distribution content and installs it on the current machine.

The following sample creates a `custom` distribution that will cause four additional tasks to be added to the project: `customDistZip`, `customDistTar`, `assembleCustomDist`, and `installCustomDist`:

.Adding extra distributions
====
include::sample[dir="snippets/base/distribution/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=custom-distribution]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/base/distribution/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=custom-distribution]"]
====

Given that the project name is `myproject` and version `1.2`, running `gradle customDistZip` will produce a ZIP file named `myproject-custom-1.2.zip`.

Running `gradle installCustomDist` will install the distribution contents into `__layout.buildDirectory.dir__("install/custom")`.

[[sec:distribution_contents]]
== Distribution contents

All of the files in the `src/__$distribution.name__/dist` directory will automatically be included in the distribution. You can add additional files by configuring the link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/distribution/Distribution.html[Distribution] object that is part of the container.

.Configuring the main distribution
====
include::sample[dir="snippets/base/distribution/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=configure-distribution]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/base/distribution/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=configure-distribution]"]
====

In the example above, the content of the `src/readme` directory will be included in the distribution (along with the files in the `src/main/dist` directory which are added by default).

The `distributionBaseName` and `distributionClassifier` properties have also been changed. This will cause the distribution archives to be created with a different name.

[[sec:publishing_distributions]]
== Publishing

A distribution can be published using the <<publishing_ivy.adoc#publishing_ivy, Ivy Publish Plugin>> or <<publishing_maven.adoc#publishing_maven, Maven Publish Plugin>>.

[[sec:publishing_distributions_publish_plugins]]
=== Using the Ivy/Maven Publish Plugins

To publish a distribution to an Ivy repository with the <<publishing_ivy.adoc#publishing_ivy, Ivy Publish Plugin>>, add one or both of its archive tasks to an link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.publish.ivy.IvyPublication.html[IvyPublication]. The following sample demonstrates how to add the ZIP archive of the `main` distribution and the TAR archive of the `custom` distribution to the `myDistribution` publication:

.Adding distribution archives to an Ivy publication
====
include::sample[dir="snippets/ivy-publish/distribution/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=publishing]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/ivy-publish/distribution/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=publishing]"]
====

Similarly, to publish a distribution to a Maven repository using the <<publishing_maven.adoc#publishing_maven, Maven Publish Plugin>>, add one or both of its archive tasks to a link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.publish.maven.MavenPublication.html[MavenPublication] as follows:

.Adding distribution archives to a Maven publication
====
include::sample[dir="snippets/maven-publish/distribution/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=publishing]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/maven-publish/distribution/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=publishing]"]
====
