Gradle Script Kotlin 1.0 M1 Release Notes
=========================================

General Notes
-------------

With this first milestone release, Gradle users can now write their
build scripts in [Kotlin](http://kotlinlang.org).

Such scripts may technically have any name ending in `.kts`, but by
convention, should favor being named `build.gradle.kts`.

See the [samples][1] for a complete getting started experience and
examples of each of the following features.

It is currently necessary to use a custom distribution of Gradle to use
Gradle Script Kotlin 1.0 M1. To configure your project to use this
custom distribution, create a Gradle wrapper in the following fashion:

    $ cd $YOUR_PROJECT_ROOT
    $ gradle wrapper --gradle-distribution-url https://repo.gradle.org/gradle/repo/demo-3.zip

With this wrapper in place and pointing to the custom distribution,
you'll be able work with a Kotlin-based build as follows:

    $ ./gradlew -b build.gradle.kts yourTask

Note that each of the samples are configured with a wrapper as per the
instructions above, and this is why they "just work".


Initial Features
----------------

 * Tasks can be declared using the lightweight `task` function.

 * Core Gradle plugins, e.g. `JavaPlugin` and `ApplicationPlugin` can be
   applied using `apply<PluginType>()`. Resolving and applying external
   plugins is not yet supported, see Limitations.

 * Plugins that publish an associated "convention" objects can be
   configured using `configure<ConventionType>() { ... }`.

 * Build scripts can be modularized using `applyFrom("other.kts")`, and
   the target script to be applied may be Groovy or Kotlin-based,
   opening up opportunities for incremental migration. The same is true
   from the Groovy side: `apply from: "other.gradle"` may refer to
   either Groovy or Kotlin-based scripts.

 * Repositories may be declared using `repositories { ... }`

 * Dependencies may be declared using `dependencies { ... }` and
   individual dependency declarations following the form
   `"compile"("group:artifact:1.0")`.

 * A variety of tooling use cases work as expected within IDEA (2016.1.2
   or better), including:

   - Project import (a `settings.gradle` file is required, see
     Limitations)

   - Quick documentation with `F1`/`CTRL-J`

   - Navigation to source with `CMD-B`

   - Auto-completion / content-assist with `CTRL-SPACE`

   - Refactoring actions

   For best results within IDEA, follow the setup instructions in the
   [samples][1] README.


Limitations
-----------

 * `settings.gradle` cannot yet be written Kotlin, continue to use
   Groovy there for now.

 * Gradle does not yet have auto-detection of Kotlin-based build
   scripts, meaning you must either:

   a. use `gradle -b build.gradle.kts`, or

   b. add `rootProject.buildFileName='build.gradle.kts'` to your
   `settings.gradle` file.

   Due to this limitation, importing projects into IDEA currently
   requires the presence of a `settings.gradle` in order for IDEA to
   recognize the project as a Gradle project

 * There is not yet support for additions to the `buildscript`
   classpath. This means that there there is not yet support for
   resolving external plugins. Naturally, this is a high priority for
   the next milestone.

 * For a complete, error-free experience in IDEA, it is necessary to run
   `./gradlew generateKtsConfig` _prior_ to importing your project into
   IDEA, and it is necessary to run `./gradlew patchIdeaConfig` _after_
   importing your project. Both of these workarounds will be unnecessary
   in future milestones. See the the [samples][1] README for
   step-by-step instructions on how to do this.

 * There is not yet any support for caching Kotlin-based build scripts,
   meaning that they must be compiled on every build. For this reason,
   expect most simple Kotlin-based builds to be marginally slower that
   an equivalent Groovy-based build.


[1]: https://github.com/gradle/gradle-script-kotlin/tree/v1.0.0-M1/samples
[modeline]: vim: textwidth=72 wrapmargin=72
