subprojects/docs/src/docs/userguide/compatibility.adoc, before:


// Copyright 2019 the original author or authors.
//
// Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
// you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
// You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
//      http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
// distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
// WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
// See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
// limitations under the License.

[[compatibility]]
= Compatibility Matrix

The sections below describe Gradle's compatibility with several integrations.
Versions not listed here may or may not work.

== Java
A Java version between 8 and 19 is required to execute Gradle.
Java 20 and later versions are not yet supported.

Java 6 and 7 can still be used for <<building_java_projects.adoc#sec:java_cross_compilation,compilation>>, but are deprecated
for use with testing. Testing with Java 6 and 7 will not be supported in Gradle 9.0.

Any fully supported version of Java can be used for compile or test.
The latest Java version may however only be supported for compile or test but not yet for running Gradle.

For older Gradle versions, please see the table below which Java version is supported by which Gradle release.

.Java Compatibility
|===
|Java version |First Gradle version to support it

| 8 | 2.0
| 9 | 4.3
| 10| 4.7
| 11| 5.0
| 12| 5.4
| 13| 6.0
| 14| 6.3
| 15| 6.7
| 16| 7.0
| 17| 7.3
| 18| 7.5
| 19| 7.6
| 20| 8.1
|===

[.yellow]#⚠#: Indicates that the Java version can be used for compilation and tests, but not yet running Gradle itself.

[[kotlin]]
== Kotlin
Gradle is tested with Kotlin 1.6.10 through 1.9.0.
Beta and RC versions may or may not work.

.Embedded Kotlin version
|===
| Gradle version | Embedded Kotlin version | Kotlin Language version

| 5.0 | 1.3.10 | 1.3
| 5.1 | 1.3.11 | 1.3
| 5.2 | 1.3.20 | 1.3
| 5.3 | 1.3.21 | 1.3
| 5.5 | 1.3.31 | 1.3
| 5.6 | 1.3.41 | 1.3
| 6.0 | 1.3.50 | 1.3
| 6.1 | 1.3.61 | 1.3
| 6.3 | 1.3.70 | 1.3
| 6.4 | 1.3.71 | 1.3
| 6.5 | 1.3.72 | 1.3
| 6.8 | 1.4.20 | 1.3
| 7.0 | 1.4.31 | 1.4
| 7.2 | 1.5.21 | 1.4
| 7.3 | 1.5.31 | 1.4
| 7.5 | 1.6.21 | 1.4
| 7.6 | 1.7.10 | 1.4
| 8.0 | 1.8.10 | 1.8
| 8.2 | 1.8.20 | 1.8
| 8.3 | 1.9.0  | 1.8
|===

== Groovy
Gradle is tested with Groovy 1.5.8 through 4.0.0.

Gradle plugins written in Groovy must use Groovy 3.x for compatibility with Gradle and Groovy DSL build scripts.

== Android
Gradle is tested with Android Gradle Plugin 7.3 through 8.0.
Alpha and beta versions may or may not work.

Commit message:

Update the java compatibility table
Introduce a new column that clarifies the different between using
toolchains and running Gradle with a Java version.

Issue #23488

subprojects/docs/src/docs/userguide/compatibility.adoc, after:


// Copyright 2019 the original author or authors.
//
// Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
// you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
// You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
//      http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
// distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
// WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
// See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
// limitations under the License.

[[compatibility]]
= Compatibility Matrix

The sections below describe Gradle's compatibility with several integrations.
Versions not listed here may or may not work.

== Java
A Java version between 8 and 20 is required to execute Gradle.
Java 21 and later versions are not yet supported.

Java 6 and 7 can still be used for <<building_java_projects.adoc#sec:java_cross_compilation,compilation>>, but are deprecated
for use with testing. Testing with Java 6 and 7 will not be supported in Gradle 9.0.

Any fully supported version of Java can be used for compile or test.
The latest Java version may however only be supported for compile or test but not yet for running Gradle.
This is achieved through the use of <<toolchains#toolchains,toolchains>> and applies to all tasks supporting toolchains.

For older Gradle versions, please see the table below which Java version is supported by which Gradle release.

.Java Compatibility
|===
|Java version | Support for compiling/testing/... | Support for running Gradle

| 8 | N/A | 2.0
| 9 | N/A | 4.3
| 10| N/A | 4.7
| 11| N/A | 5.0
| 12| N/A | 5.4
| 13| N/A | 6.0
| 14| N/A | 6.3
| 15| 6.7 | 6.7
| 16| 7.0 | 7.0
| 17| 7.3 | 7.3
| 18| 7.5 | 7.5
| 19| 7.6 | 7.6
| 20| 8.1 | 8.3
|===

[[kotlin]]
== Kotlin
Gradle is tested with Kotlin 1.6.10 through 1.9.0.
Beta and RC versions may or may not work.

.Embedded Kotlin version
|===
| Gradle version | Embedded Kotlin version | Kotlin Language version

| 5.0 | 1.3.10 | 1.3
| 5.1 | 1.3.11 | 1.3
| 5.2 | 1.3.20 | 1.3
| 5.3 | 1.3.21 | 1.3
| 5.5 | 1.3.31 | 1.3
| 5.6 | 1.3.41 | 1.3
| 6.0 | 1.3.50 | 1.3
| 6.1 | 1.3.61 | 1.3
| 6.3 | 1.3.70 | 1.3
| 6.4 | 1.3.71 | 1.3
| 6.5 | 1.3.72 | 1.3
| 6.8 | 1.4.20 | 1.3
| 7.0 | 1.4.31 | 1.4
| 7.2 | 1.5.21 | 1.4
| 7.3 | 1.5.31 | 1.4
| 7.5 | 1.6.21 | 1.4
| 7.6 | 1.7.10 | 1.4
| 8.0 | 1.8.10 | 1.8
| 8.2 | 1.8.20 | 1.8
| 8.3 | 1.9.0  | 1.8
|===

== Groovy
Gradle is tested with Groovy 1.5.8 through 4.0.0.

Gradle plugins written in Groovy must use Groovy 3.x for compatibility with Gradle and Groovy DSL build scripts.

== Android
Gradle is tested with Android Gradle Plugin 7.3 through 8.0.
Alpha and beta versions may or may not work.
