Gradle Kotlin DSL 0.14.0 Release Notes
============================

Gradle Kotlin DSL v0.14.0 brings the latest and greatest Kotlin 1.2, improved interoperability with Groovy plugins and more.

v0.14.0 will be included in Gradle 4.5.

The features in this release are also available for immediate use within the latest Gradle Kotlin DSL distribution snapshot. To use it, upgrade your Gradle wrapper in the following fashion:

    $ cd $YOUR_PROJECT_ROOT
    $ gradle wrapper --gradle-distribution-url https://repo.gradle.org/gradle/kotlin-dsl-snapshots-local/gradle-kotlin-dsl-4.5-20171202002741+0000-all.zip

Once Gradle 4.5 RC1 is out, we encourage all users to upgrade in the following fashion:

    $ cd $YOUR_PROJECT_ROOT
    $ gradle wrapper --gradle-version 4.5-rc-1 --distribution-type all

Breaking changes
----------------

There are no breaking changes upgrading from 0.13.1 to 0.14.0.

Updates since v0.13.1
----------------------

 * **Kotlin 1.2** (#617, #526). The embedded Kotlin version was upgraded from Kotlin 1.1.51 to the latest [Kotlin 1.2 release](https://blog.jetbrains.com/kotlin/2017/11/kotlin-1-2-released/).

 * **Improved Groovy interop with null receiving closures** (#594). Thanks to @JLLeitschuh it's now much easier to interact with plugins that expect Groovy closures that either accept or return `null`.

 * **Navigation to Gradle sources in IDEA with a `-bin` distribution** (#604). Previously, the Kotlin DSL runtime expected an `-all` Gradle distribution to be used in order to enable navigation to the Gradle sources. When this distribution wasn't used (typically with the wrapper) navigating to Gradle sources wasn't possible. Starting with this release, whenever the Gradle sources are not available locally, the Kotlin DSL runtime will do its best to download a compatible source distribution and make it available to the IDE for navigation.

 * **Android sample update** (#586). Now on Android Gradle Plugin 3.0.1.
